>>ERICH VON DANIKEN: We
have all heard of the myths
and the legends of our history.
But is there another story?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I was educated in Switzerland
as a strict Catholic.
And of course, as a young man,
I was a deep believer in God.
By the way, I still am
a deep believer in God.
But, as a young man, God had
to have some qualities for me.
For example, God
makes no mistakes.
God is omnipotent.
He's all over.
He doesn't need a vehicle in
which to move from point A
to point B. Of course,
God makes no mistake.
That I had in my head.
As a 15- 16-year-old boy.
I was educated in a strict
Catholic school led by Jesuits.
And there we had to
learn Latin and Greek.
And always we had to
translate parts of the Bible
from one language to the other.
And I realized, slowly,
that the God of the Bible
does not have these
qualities I expected.
For example, the
God in the Bible,
he is using a vehicle
in which to move around,
described by the prophet,
Ezekiel, for example.
And the God in the
Bible, he makes mistakes.
He creates human, and he
says, and it was good.
But later he finds
he was not good,
and he decided to
destroy them all.
He makes experiences.
He sent Adam and
Eve to the paradise.
And he knows at once that
they will make a sin.
And they promptly make what
he expected, what he knows.
And I was very disappointed.
So, I simply had doubts in
my own Catholic religion
in my education.
I wanted to know if other
communities in antiquity
have similar stories as
we had in my religion.
And that was the beginning
of "Chariots of the Gods."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I started to read
Hindu mythologies.
And even in the college, I
was educated in the college,
some of the professor who knows
that I had doubts in religion
said, Erich, go to
the university library
and ask for the Book of Enoch.
And as a 17-year-old,
I read Enoch.
And I realized that here
someone is telling us
the story in the
first person, and he's
talking about guardians of
the sky, fallen angels, sex
with humans.
That was really absolutely
crazy for my young brain.
So my doubts continued.
And I decided I want, in the
beginning, only as a hobby,
follow this path.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I was growing up in hotels.
My family were hotel managers.
So, I was growing up, running to
reception in bars and kitchen,
and so it was absolutely normal
that after my high school,
I took the way of
hotel business.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So I was in the
hotel special school.
I was a waiter.
I was a receptionist.
I was a barkeeper.
And whenever today I
sit in a restaurant
and I realize that the
waiters or the barkeepers
are doing something wrong, I
said to myself, come on, Erich,
you could do better.
You could stand behind the bar
or behind the reception desk.
So, when I finally wrote
"Chariots of the Gods,"
I was managing director of
a five-star hotel in Davos,
which is a place in
the Swiss Mountains.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I was fascinated by the
idea that in the Bible
and the religions, we are the
victims of misunderstanding.
I was fascinated.
At that time in Germany,
there was a magazine
called, "Neues Europa"--
"New Europe."
And as a young man,
as a waiter already, I
was writing for this magazine.
Even in high school,
I was good in writing.
I always had the best
notes in writing.
So, I wrote for this magazine
about mysterious things
in the Bible, and so on.
In 1964, that was four years
before "Chariots of the Gods"
was on the market, I
published an article.
It was a full double-page
in a big Canadian newspaper.
It was a German newspaper
called, "Der Nord-Westen"--
"The North West,"
appeared in Winnipeg.
And the title was, "Were the
Gods of the Bible Astronauts?"
by Erich von Daniken.
So, I was writing
about that subject
long before I made
"Chariots of the Gods."
I was working in hotels,
and the hotels had seasons,
you know, summer
season, winter season.
Between the seasons, I
was always traveling.
I learned, in all these books,
about archeological mysteries.
So, I wanted to go there.
And always before I went
to an archeological place,
I knew the literature
[INAUDIBLE]
and I knew the
scientific literature.
I knew what the archaeologists
said about such and such place.
So, I read the book
before I traveled.
Even as an 19-year-old, I was
for the first time in Egypt.
At the high school I was, it
was a school for rich kids.
And one of the rich kids in my
classroom was an Egyptian boy.
And he invited me to Egypt.
So, as a 19-year-old, I was the
first time sitting on a camel.
And standing before the
pyramids as a 19-year-old,
I was the first time in
subterranean caves in Saqqara.
So, I was writing
about this subject,
even as a hotel manager.
And, of course, by the years,
I knew I learned a lot.
And in the evening I was always
discussion with some guests.
Finally, one of the
guests said, you
should write the book, Erich.
I said, the book?
OK, why not?
So, I wrote the book, "Chariots
of the Gods," in my free time
in the afternoon and evening.
And the original
book had 235 pages.
Then I sent this manuscript
to 20 different publishers
in Germany.
And 20 publishers sent it
back, each and every one
with, Well, this is
not for our society.
This is not for our edition.
This is not professional
enough, et cetera, right?
All were turned back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
One of the hotel guests I
had was the editor-in-chief
of a big German magazine.
The magazine's name is
"Die Zeit" at the time.
And I said to him, I
have a manuscript now
but nobody wants to publish it.
And he said, Erich, I
probably can help you.
The next morning he
was phoning to someone,
which I didn't know, and I
hear it, still as if today.
He said to someone,
listen, Erwin, I
am standing here in a hotel
in Davos in Switzerland,
and I have a young man here.
And this young man has
written a complete crazy book,
but the man is not crazy.
You should listen to him.
So, that is how was
"Chariots of the Gods"
was published in February,
1968, in Switzerland first.
The German title in the
beginning had, of course,
German words, "Erinnerungen
an die Zukunft,"
means, memories of the future.
Normally, you can
memorize only the past.
You cannot memorize the future.
So, "Memories of the Future"
was the original title
in the German language.
Because I had the idea we were
visited by extraterrestrials.
And we, the human race,
we would do the same thing
in the future.
We will visit
other solar systems
and we will influence others.
That's why "Memories
of the Future."
This title has come to the
desk of my British publisher.
In London, it was
Souvenir Press.
And Mr. Ernest Hecht,
he could do nothing
with "Memories of the Future."
Nobody has memories
of the future.
We can memory, have memory of
the past, not of the future.
And because I quoted Ezekiel
in "Chariots of the Gods,"
and the word,
chariots, is expressed,
chariots of the
gods, in Ezekiel,
Killed the British
publisher decided
to name the book,
"Chariots of the Gods."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In Switzerland, we have
also different magazines.
And one of the big magazines,
not just today, is called,
"Die Weltwoche," the
"Week of the World."
And "Die Weltwoche,"
they started
to publish that German version
of "Chariots of the Gods."
So, it has become a
bestseller before the book
itself was on the market.
Because at that time, I knew
already the "Mahabharata."
I knew the Book of Enoch.
And I slowly understood, my God,
this is all a misunderstanding.
The gods must have
been astronauts
from another solar system.
When I wrote "Chariots
of the Gods,"
I had the opinion that I
am the first person who
write about these things.
Later, when "Chariots of the
Gods" were on the market,
I received several letters
where people just mentioned,
"Dear Mr. von Daniken, but a
similar idea we have already
in such and such a
science fiction story.'
So, science fiction
authors were already
writing about this
speculation, you know,
so astronauts are
traveling to another world.
And there they are
looked at as gods.
And so, even in some
scientific newspapers--
and all this I learned later
when "Chariots of the Gods"
was on the market--
in scientific
newspapers there were
articles written by scientists
with the same question.
So, I was not the
first with that idea,
and not the first on the market.
But I was the first one who took
it for serious, not as fiction.
I took it as fact.
And I brought in
"Chariots of the Gods"
all the sources I mentioned.
Where did I have these questions
and these answers from?
So, I took it seriously,
You know, when "Chariots of
the Gods" was first published,
and my German publisher, he
found an English publisher.
And at that time, I was
absolutely no professional
concerning writing in these
things being an author.
So, my German
publisher suggested,
OK, all the foreign right,
we make half and half
between the publishing
house and the author.
I said, OK.
I agree.
I didn't do nothing about it.
So, the German publisher
sold "Chariots of the Gods"
to a British
publisher in London.
The British publisher sold the
right to an American publisher
in New York, hardcover.
It was Putnam's and Son.
Putnam's and Son sold
the paperback rights
to another company
in the United States.
Now, they sold about
8 million paperbacks
of "Chariots of the
Gods," but this publisher
made half and half with Putnam.
Putnam made half and half
with the British publisher.
The British publisher made half
and half with the German ones,
and the Germans with me.
So, from this 8 million
of "Chariots of the Gods"
as paperback, I maybe
received a few cents per copy.
So I made money, of course.
I'm not blaming no one,
for it was my mistake.
But it's not that I have
ever become a rich man.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I was crashed down from
the beginning, especially
the archaeologists, but also
theologians crashed me down
and made out a fool of me.
After "Chariots of the Gods"
was a bestseller number one,
even in the United States, soon
after that a small booklet came
on the market with the title,
"Crash Go the Chariots."
The author was this professor,
Dr. Clifford Wilson.
I asked my publisher,
who is this professor
doctor because the press said,
he's a professor in archeology.
He crashed me down that
everything I was writing
was nonsense and fantasy,
and I did not take seriously
the scientific community, etc.
But my publisher said,
it doesn't matter.
This anti chariots could simply
help the sale, so don't worry.
Years passed and I met this
professor, Dr. Clifford Wilson,
on a TV show in Australia.
And we were very friendly,
very correct together.
And after we were
drinking a glass of wine,
and I said, professor,
what kind of archeology
is your specialty?
I mean are you an Egyptologist
or Central American
archeologist?
He said, Erich, I'm
not an archaeologist.
I'm a minister.
I'm a priest.
So, do you know that
many of the attacks
have come from the
side of the church,
not only the Catholic
church, different sects
crashed me down, made a fool
out of me because they said,
come on, he disturbs
our believing.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When "Chariots of the
Gods" came on the market,
in a Swiss newspaper I was
crashed completely concerning
the tombstone of Palenque.
It was an archaeologist who
crashed me down completely
and who gives the scientific
explanation what all this is
and Erich von Daniken's
just all nonsense.
Now he put me in his
article in the corner
of a group of idiots.
I'm a fool.
I am just one who
wants to have right,
and in reality I understand
nothing from archeology.
And he was harming me and
he did it expressively.
In the meantime,
this archaeologist
has become an old man.
He wrote me a
letter two years ago
where he apologized
for this case.
And he said, Erich, I
was doing you wrong.
And I will not die
before you forgive me.
So, of course, I wrote
him a wonderful letter.
That's all over, the fight, 40
years in the past, of course.
I forgive you.
Be happy and go to
the next dimension.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
All my books, not only "Chariots
of the Gods," also, our titles
were never published
in the Communist block
until 10 years ago, never.
Finally, I was in Poland and
I met one of the professors,
you know, one of
these ideologists.
And I asked him, what do you
have against Erich von Daniken?
And he said, Erich,
you know, according
to Darwin's theory of evolution
everything has grown by itself.
It's evolution.
We don't need God anymore.
God is dead.
And now an idiot like you
can and creates or invents
new gods, extraterrestrials.
That's why they were against me.
In the meantime, the situation
has changed completely.
In the meantime,
of course, my books
do exist in Poland and
Romania, and so on,
including in Red China.
Whenever I am in one
of these countries,
I have to sign books,
signing sessions,
I have to give speeches.
They are very, very excited.
Of course, there
is still criticism.
It doesn't matter.
I love the criticism.
You know, soon as you speak
honestly with the criticism,
the scientists, you are honest.
You are not bluffing.
You're not trying to
cheat him, to lie him.
And what you say is correct.
And you listen to the other.
You're not only
talking yourself.
After two or three
hours of discussion,
the other side always says
to me, Mr. von Daniken,
we didn't know about this.
We never hear about these texts.
We learn from each other.
I learn from the critics
and they learn from me.
Since "Chariots of the Gods,"
I have written 40 more titles.
And all my titles
together, worldwide, they
have sold about
72 million copies.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I believe that we are unique.
Mankind is something
special on this universe
because of our education.
In the education, we
have two possibilities.
We have religious
people, and they
believe that God
made everything,
but we are the
crown of creation.
We have a scientific community.
The scientific community
says, it's all evolution,
but we are on top of evolution.
In both cases, if you look
at the religiously, crown
of creation, or scientifically,
top of evolution,
in both cases, we look
at us, we are unique.
Something like us does not
exist anymore in the universe.
And when I was young,
I had the same opinion.
I said we are unique.
Then slowly, I learned
that the gods in antiquity
must have been astronauts,
so I have become modest.
I said, come on, Erich.
We are nothing in this universe.
So the situation has changed,
has changed my feelings.
I have become more
sober, more modest,
and not talking nonsense and
believing we are the greatest.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We have to differentiate
between old, holy writings
and archaeological facts.
From the old, holy
writings, the biggest point
was definitely the Book
of Enoch because Enoch
writes in the first person,
what happened to him.
And the Book of Enoch is
not part of the Bible.
Normal people never hear
about the Book of Enoch.
And if they hear about it, is
there must be a falsification.
In the Bible, you read only
two phrases about Enoch.
He was the first
man who disappeared
with the fiery chariot,
the first human who
left our planet.
And when I read the German
version of the Book of Enoch,
I was absolutely thrilled.
This is fantastic.
This is incredible.
The Book of Enoch I don't
consider as mythology.
The Book of Enoch is
written in the first person,
and that's absolutely
the top title.
On the other hand,
in India there
is this gigantic mythology
of the Mahabharata,
the Vedic mythology.
And there is "Drona Parva."
When I read "Drona Parva,"
are completely shocked
again because in "Drona
Parva" they clearly
speak about three
cities in the firmament.
The humans watch them.
They looked up there.
The three cities had
different powers, etc.
So when I read this,
also, in the "Drona Parva"
for the first time I read about
atomic explosions in deep past.
Cities were
completely destroyed.
Elephants were burning,
turning around.
All this is in
the "Drona Parva."
When I read this, I was shocked.
Also, I said, Erich come on.
Thousands of years ago
and nobody mentioned it?
The most interesting fact,
which really shocks your head
is the tombstone of Palenque.
I was standing on
this tombstone.
I made photos.
And you're completely shocked.
The picture is absolutely clear.
There is a man sitting
in a sort of capsule,
bending forward like a
motor racing cyclist.
He uses his hand to manipulate.
He has a mask on his nose.
He's sitting on a chair.
And outside the frame
there is a linking flame.
When you see all this, you
are completely shocked.
And you know, this stone
plate was chiseled at least
2,600 years ago in the past.
So this was the real revelation
in archaeological view.
The Temple of
Inscription in Palenque,
which is in reality
a pyramid, according
to official archeology is maybe
about 600 AD, so not very old.
But the tomb, with the
tombstone of Palenque,
because there were
stalactites, stalagmites,
must be much older
than the pyramid which
was put up later on the
tomb, so at least 2 and 1/2
thousand years,
if not much more.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Some 30 years ago, I knew
a young man in Germany.
And he had a close
encounter with UFOs.
And he told me his story,
and he was absolutely
an honorable young man, and
I believed what he said.
He was in a UFO.
And I said to him, when you
have a contact again with them,
please tell them one of my
friends is Erich von Daniken.
He wishes that he sees or
that he was taken into a UFO.
Why don't you give him a chance?
And my first question
would be the question
about God and the universe.
How did it all start?
What is your religion?
What is your knowledge about
this spirit of the universe?
Have you been here
thousands of years ago
or do you know of other
societies who were here
thousands of years ago?
Was I right or wrong by
saying the Bible is wrong
and all the religious
books are wrong?
Was I wrong or was I correct?
I would ask this.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
A few months later
I met him again.
And I said, you
had contact again?
He said, yes.
I said, what about my question?
He said, yes, I did.
So why have I never seen a UFO?
He said, they told me if
they would show up to me,
I would get crazy somehow.
My character is
in a way that I'm
so enthusiastic that I
would write and speak only
about this.
And the press or the
scientific community
would not take me
for serious anymore.
I should continue with my
line, archeology and mythology.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I am sure within
the next 10 years,
it will be official by
the scientific community
and from the governments,
we are under observation.
There is life out there.
They were here
thousands of years ago,
and they are back here now.
This is a question
of the next 10 years
because we have the
answer in our genes.
That's one thing.
And we will find the answer
on the surface of Mars,
on the back side on the
moon, and on Sirius.
On Mars, wonderful
photographs have
been made of the surface
of Mars in a good quality.
And there are some
people who are studying
these photos for days and days.
I know one of them.
And there are absolutely
strange structures on Mars,
like something who
looks like a pyramid,
or something who are definitely
a triangle and other things.
Now again, in science
we try to find
the next plausible, reasonable
answer, which is correct.
It's good to do so.
But if these things continue, if
we find more strange structures
on Mars, on the moon,
for example, around Mars
we have two moons,
Phobos and Deimos.
And these two moons, they turn
around mass over the equator.
If one moon does
this by coincidence,
it's possible,
but two moons not.
And they are the only
moons who surround
their planet, Mars, faster
than Mars turns by itself.
Some 20 years ago,
I was in Moscow
and I had a discussion
with Professor Shklovsky.
Shklovsky was the
head of astronomy
at the Sternberg
Institute in Moscow.
And he said to me, Erich,
these two moons surrounding
Mars are artificial.
They are hollow.
So, this will be one
of the explanations
in the next future.
And on Phobos, some
of our satellites
found something
like a monolight.
You just clearly see the
monolight in the shadow.
It has nothing to do out there.
So, we will find on the
surface of these planets
strange things, which
definitely are artificial.
And then we have no way out.
So we have to confess
it to the humans.
Yes, there is the answer.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
My desire is to change
the spirit of time.
From all archaeological
points I have written,
I know the scientific
literature.
I do never write about
an archaeological temple
or complex without knowing
the scientific literature.
Also, when I read some
mythologies, or religious books
like the Bible, Ezekiel, I
know the scientific literature
behind it.
Concerning Ezekiel,
I read 41 books
of theologians, professors,
doctors, brilliant men,
who gave their explanation
about Ezekiel, how
we must look at it.
Now it is my desire to bring at
least a little part of mankind
to new questions.
Have we been wrong in
our interpretation,
interpreting the
Bible, the religions,
some of the
archaeological artifacts?
It is my wish that
a part of mankind
starts to rethink these old
things with the new idea,
with a new consciousness, and
by this, we change the world.
Because we changed the
feeling, we change religion,
and we become not
so arrogant anymore.
We become humble.
We learn we are a little,
little, teeny piece
in a famous universe of millions
of extraterrestrial forms
of life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I am always looking for
stories, and at the moment
I am writing a lot of books.
I want to find out
what is possible
and what will be possible
in genetics in the future.
I want to find out by the
scientific literature,
will it be possible to
travel to the next stars?
Is it possible to reach
the speed of light or even
over speed of light?
So I will learn all this and
I come to my own conclusions.
Of course, my
project is to speak
with a lot of
theologians, theologians
who generally are brilliant
people, especially
the old theologians.
They are not stubborn anymore.
You can talk to them.
So I hope to change their mind,
and then know in some cases,
I was successful.
So that's my working.
And I am doing a lot
of speeches worldwide.
I try to wake up the people,
not as a figure of having right;
I am the one who was right.
No, that's not the idea.
I always say, please criticize.
Don't believe what I say.
Be critical, but
read the stories.
And that's what I'm doing now.
"Chariots of the
Gods" has definitely
influenced millions
of people and hundreds
of different authors.
Since "Chariots of the
Gods," we have many books
on the market by
brilliant people.
I mean, Tellinger, Sitchin
are just some examples.
There are other authors, other
researchers who go on the same
trail and came out with
new mysteries of the past,
which I didn't.
So in my time, so
I have influenced
a little part of mankind.
Always when I have speeches, and
I'm sitting on a signing table,
many people come to
me and say, Erich, you
have changed my life.
I was a theologian and
you have changed my life.
I was an archaeologist,
I see it now with
different eyes.
So I have changed
a little something.
In the meantime,
I'm 82 years old.
I am happy and graceful, but
my brain functions and my body
functions, more or less.
But my brain functions.
I have not forgotten
nothing of what I learned
in the antique, old books.
Sooner or later, I
will die, of course,
We have a brilliant
organization, our society,
and I have a brilliant young man
who is handling this society.
And also we have
an organization.
You just go to internet,
and you look to RAMAR.
RAMAR is society
and organization.
They put together all the
archaeological places.
And you can go on camera to
these archaeological places.
They show the links
between the lines,
between all these places.
So, whenever I die, the
story I have started
will never die out.
This will continue.
We have to realize we are
neither the crown of creation
nor the top of evolution.
We have to become
humble and learn
that our universe is
full of forms of life,
and that we have been
visited by ETs in the past,
and we are visited right now.
This is what we have to
learn and to understand.
It was a pleasure to be here.
Thank you for your help
and your understanding.
[MUSIC PLAYING]